The short drop is a method of hanging in which the condemned prisoner stands on a raised support such as a stool, ladder, cart, or other vehicle, with the noose around the neck. The support is then moved away, leaving the person dangling from the rope.
The standard drop involves a drop of between 4 and 6 feet and came into use from 1866. It was considered a humane improvement on the short drop because it was intended to be enough to break the person's neck, causing immediate unconsciousness and rapid brain death.
The long drop process, also known as the measured drop, was introduced to Britain in 1872. Instead of everyone falling the same standard distance, the person's height and weight were used to determine how much slack would be provided in the rope so that the distance dropped would be enough to ensure that the neck was broken, but not so much that the person was decapitated.
In Canada, hanging is the most common method of suicide, and in the U.S. hanging is the second most common method, after self-inflicted gunshot wounds.
There are some suggestions that the Vikings practiced hanging as human sacrifices to Odin, to honour Odin's own sacrifice of hanging himself from Yggdrasil.
Hanging is the only method of execution in Bangladesh, ever since its independence.
Death by hanging was the customary method of capital punishment in Brazil throughout its history until the death penalty was abolished for all crimes, except for those committed under extraordinary circumstances such as war or military law, in 1890.
Historically, hanging was the only method of execution used in Canada and was in use as possible punishment for all murders until 1961.
Death by hanging is the primary means of capital punishment in Iran, which carries out one of the highest numbers of annual executions in the world. The method used is the short drop, which does not break the neck of the condemned, but rather causes a slower death due to strangulation.
Hanging was one means by which Puritans of the Massachusetts Bay Colony enforced religious and intellectual conformity on the whole community.
The largest mass execution in the United States, of 38 Sioux Indians sentenced to death after being charged for engaging in massacres of white settlers, was carried out by hanging in Mankato, Minnesota in 1862.
A completely different principle of hanging is to hang the convicted person from their legs, rather than from their neck, either as a form of torture, or as an execution method.
In 1713, Juraj Jánošík, a semi-legendary Slovak outlaw and folk hero, was sentenced to be hanged from his left rib. He was left to slowly die.